# Asbestos-Fiber-Segmentation

Abstract

Asbestos is a group of naturally occurring fibrous minerals with a crystalline structure. When in- haled, asbestos fibers can settle deep in the lungs, where the immune system is unable to break them down, leading to lung damage and scarring, known as asbestosis. Additionally, exposure to asbestos significantly increases the risk of developing lung cancer and mesothelioma. For these reasons, it is crucial to control asbestos in building materials and other areas. However, manually identifying asbestos fibers in low-magnification electron microscopy images is chal- lenging, even for experts. Computer vision algorithms can assist in this process by automatically detecting the presence of asbestos and its precise coordinates in images.

This thesis presents a computer vision-based algorithm using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with a U-net architecture to segment asbestos fibers in low-magnification electron mi- croscopy images. A significant challenge addressed in this work was the limited amount of anno- tated data, which was mitigated through extensive data augmentation techniques, such as im- age cropping, random rotations and others. These techniques were carefully balanced to avoid over-augmenting the data, which could result in unrealistic images, and under-augmenting, which could lead to overfitting. Achieving this balance was crucial for optimal segmentation performance
Multiple experiments were conducted to optimize the model, including the exploration of different loss functions, learning rate schedulers, and the number of filters in the convolutional layers. Notably, the use of a weighted combination of Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) with Dice loss significantly improved performance across segmentation quality metrics, achieving an ROC AUC of 0.9864, Average precision(PR curve) of 0.5076, and Jaccard score of 0.36. The OneCycle learning rate scheduler also demonstrated superior results compared to other tested schedulers.

The findings from this research indicate that selecting the appropriate loss function and learning rate scheduler is critical in optimizing segmentation performance, especially when working with limited data. Future research could explore multiclass asbestos segmentation to not only detect the presence of asbestos but also classify fibers based on their threat levels, further assisting in automated image analysis workflows.
